Clarify identity generated from CIDR-based policies and add security identity internal docs (#16716)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/internals/security-identities.rst

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _security_identities:

*******************
Security Identities
*******************

Security identities are generated from labels. They are stored as ``uint16``,
which means the maximum limit for a security identity is ``2^16 - 1``. The
minimum security identity is ``256``, because reserve the identities from ``1``
to ``255``.

There are two caveats to the above however:

1) ClusterMesh
2) Identities generated from CIDR-based policies

> 1) TODO: Explain ClusterMesh

Reviewer: Clustermesh is the same, we just add 8 bits on top to identify the cluster. `cluster-id` is used for this.

So in effect we have:

0x00000000 - 0x0000FFFF => cluster-local identities
0x00010000 - 0x00FFFFFF => identities for remote clusters
0x01000000 - 0x0100FFFF => identities for CIDRs (node-local)

Reviewer: Or, put another way, the bits at 0x00FF0000 represent the cluster-id of that identity.

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _security_identities:

*******************
Security Identities
*******************

Security identities are generated from labels. They are stored as ``uint16``,
which means the maximum limit for a security identity is ``2^16 - 1``. The
minimum security identity is ``256``, because reserve the identities from ``1``

> to ``255``.

Reviewer 2: `because reserve the identities from...` -> Missing subject?

There are two caveats to the above however:

1) ClusterMesh
2) Identities generated from CIDR-based policies

For (1), an extra 8 bits are added as the ``cluster-id``, into the 3rd octet as

> shown by ``0x00FF0000``.

Reviewer 2: Should this mention that this additional octet identifies a cluster, and is non-null? Just reading through the sentence I did not find it super clear.

Author: I've added a bit more to it. LMK if this is any better.

For (2), CIDR identities are local to each node. This means that they're not
subject to the global limit of security identities (``2^16 - 1``). CIDR
identities begin from ``1`` and end at ``16777215``, however since they're
shifted by ``24``, this makes their effective range ``1 | (1 << 24)`` to
``16777215 | (1 << 24)``.

.. note::

   When CIDR policies are applied, the identity generated is local to each

>    node.  In other words, the identity may not be the same for the same CIDR

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   node. In other words, the identity may not be the same for the same CIDR
```

   policy across two nodes. Additionally, CIDR identities are not included

>    within the numerical identities range (256 - 2^16 -1), as it is stored

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   within the numerical identities range (``256 - 2^16 -1``), as it is stored
```
for consistency with the rest of the document

   separately inside the Agent.

Overall, the following represents the different ranges:

.. code::

    0x00000000 - 0x0000FFFF => cluster-local identities
    0x00010000 - 0x00FFFFFF => identities for remote clusters

>     0x01000000 - 0x0100FFFF => identities for CIDRs (node-local)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    0x00000000 - 0x0000FFFF (0    to 2^16 - 1)        => cluster-local identities
    0x00010000 - 0x00FFFFFF (2^16 to 2^24 - 1)        => identities for remote clusters
    0x01000000 - 0x0100FFFF (2^24 to 2^24 + 2^16 - 1) => identities for CIDRs (node-local)
```
Not sure if using the power of 2 makes it easier to relate to the explanations above, or more confusing? That's just a suggestion, feel free to ignore.

Regarding the ranges: Are `0`, `0x10000` and `0x1000000` valid identities? From the text above, I thought the ranges should start at `1`, `0x10001` and `0x1000001` respectively?

Author: From my understanding of the code, both the min and max are included.

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _security_identities:

*******************
Security Identities
*******************

> Security identities are generated from labels. They are stored as ``uint16``,

Reviewer: Where is the security identity stored as a `uint16`?

Reviewer: For reference, here's the golang definition:

https://github.com/cilium/cilium/blob/62adcc5c24887af808741739491fcecfc6995a42/pkg/identity/numericidentity.go#L405-L411

Reviewer: (given that this is internal documentation, I wonder whether we could link to this somehow from the docs. Not sure how to make those links stable against refactoring / code changes though)

Author: Thanks, clearly I didn't proof read this before submitting :sweat_smile: 

Good point on linking the internal docs, I think we can point at https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/cilium/cilium/pkg/identity#NumericIdentity. I will add that

which means the maximum limit for a security identity is ``2^16 - 1``. The
minimum security identity is ``256``, due to the reserved identity range being
from ``1`` to ``255``.

There are two caveats to the above however:

1) ClusterMesh

> 2) Identities generated from CIDR-based policies

Reviewer: I find this explanation a little bit confusing, because it attempts to describe what the ranges may denote, but on the way towards explaining all of the identity space, small assertions are made which are later contradicted.

For instance, the text ```The minimum security identity is ``256`` ``` suggests that the allocation range for cluster-wide identities starts from 256. But the text itself says that the minimum security identity is 256, and then the very next sentence describes that there are security identities below this minimum.

The "there are two caveats" part also contradicts the `uint16` storage assertion - if some of the system supports 32-bit identities then we can't outright declare that the security identity is a `uint16`, because some security identities are not uint16s.

I think that it's fairly safe to say that any arbitrary security identity will fall under the range `1 - 2^32-1`. There are limitations to this, for instance in general any identity that may be shared across multiple nodes (either inside the cluster or between Cilium-managed clusters) must fit inside a VXLAN or Geneve tunnel endpoint header's virtual network field, which is 24 bits for both of these protocols. So in practice, when handing traffic between nodes, the value must fall within `0 - 2^24-1`. In practice, we reserve the first 256 values and hence there may be additional special semantics for these identities. Then values above `2^24` cannot be shared directly between nodes via tunnel headers, so we avoid using these for consistent global identities; this is why the "local identities" set the lowest bit of the fourth byte.

For (1), an extra 8 bits are added as the ``cluster-id`` which identifies the
cluster in the ClusterMesh, into the 3rd octet as shown by ``0x00FF0000``. This
makes the security identity's upper limit ``2^24 - 1``. This does not apply to
CIDR identities however, see (2).

For (2), CIDR identities are local to each node. This means that they're not
subject to the global limit of security identities (``2^16 - 1``). CIDR
identities begin from ``1`` and end at ``16777215``, however since they're
shifted by ``24``, this makes their effective range ``1 | (1 << 24)`` to
``16777215 | (1 << 24)``.

.. note::

   When CIDR policies are applied, the identity generated is local to each
   node. In other words, the identity may not be the same for the same CIDR
   policy across two nodes. Additionally, CIDR identities are not included
   within the numerical identities range (``256 - 2^16 -1``), as it is stored
   separately inside the Agent.

Overall, the following represents the different ranges:

.. code::

>    0x00000000 - 0x0000FFFF (0    to 2^16 - 1)        => cluster-local identities

Reviewer: I think it's worth calling out that `0` is never explicitly set as a valid identity value, but rather if this shows up somewhere then this typically either means "we don't know the identity" (particularly in hubble output), or in a few cases "any identity" (for example, in policy in the eBPF datapath we set identity=0 with a port=nonzero to apply l4-only policy which applies to all identities.) . It doesn't have a fixed corresponding set of labels like any other identity.

Author: Good idea. I've added a section for this.

   0x00010000 - 0x00FFFFFF (2^16 to 2^24 - 1)        => identities for remote clusters

>    0x01000000 - 0x0100FFFF (2^24 to 2^24 + 2^16 - 1) => identities for CIDRs (node-local)

Reviewer: :+1: 

For completeness, we could also include the range 0x01010000 - 0xFFFFFFFF and just say `=> undefined` / unused / reserved for future use.

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

> 
> .. _security_identities:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

*******************
Security Identities
*******************

Security identities are generated from labels. They are stored as ``uint32``,
which means the maximum limit for a security identity is ``2^32 - 1``. The
minimum security identity is ``1``, due to the reserved identity range being

> from ``1`` to ``255``. See the `internal code documentation

Reviewer 2: Not clear why the `reserved identity range being from 1 to 255` _causes_ the minimum value to be 1.

Author: Bad wording. The actual identity range starts at 1 because the first reserved ID is 1. 0 is a special case as mentioned in the note.

<https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/cilium/cilium/pkg/identity#NumericIdentity>`_.

.. note::

   Identitiy 0 is not a valid value. If it shows up in Hubble output, this
   means the identity was not found. In the eBPF datapath, it has a special
   role where it denotes "any identity", i.e. as a wildcard allow in policy
   map.

> There are two caveats to the above however:

Reviewer 2: In what regard are they caveats to the above?

Author: I think "caveat" was the wrong word choice here. Your suggestion makes more sense as the identity ranges are just different groups, rather than "caveats".

1) ClusterMesh
2) Identities generated from CIDR-based policies

For (1), 8 bits are used as the ``cluster-id`` which identifies the cluster in
the ClusterMesh, into the 3rd octet as shown by ``0x00FF0000``. This does not
apply to CIDR identities however, see (2).

For (2), CIDR identities are local to each node. This means that they're not

> subject to the global limit of security identities (``2^16 - 1``). CIDR

Reviewer 2: This “global limit” is no longer defined above, security identities are now introduced as `uint32`s.

identities begin from ``1`` and end at ``16777215``, however since they're
shifted by ``24``, this makes their effective range ``1 | (1 << 24)`` to
``16777215 | (1 << 24)`` or from ``16777217`` to ``33554431``.

When CIDR policies are applied, the identity generated is local to each node.
In other words, the identity may not be the same for the same CIDR policy
across two nodes. Additionally, CIDR identities are not included within the

> numerical identities range (``256 - 2^24 -1``), as they're stored separately

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
numerical identities range (``256`` to ``2^24 - 1``), as they're stored separately
```
The dash is confusing here.

inside the Agent.

CIDR identities are never used for traffic between Cilium-managed nodes, so
they do not need to fit inside of a VXLAN or Geneve virtual network field.
Non-CIDR identities are limited to 24 bits so that they will fit in these
fields on the wire, but since CIDR identities will not be encoded in these
packets, they can start with a higher value. Hence, the minimum value for a

> CIDR identity is `2^24` .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CIDR identity is ``2^24`` .
```
RST syntax

> CIDR identity is `2^24` .

Reviewer 2: `minimum value for a CIDR identity is 2^24` -> This contradicts the above, where we state that the minimum is `1 | (1 << 24)` (2^24 + 1)?

    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

*******************
Security Identities
*******************

Security identities are generated from labels. They are stored as ``uint32``,
which means the maximum limit for a security identity is ``2^32 - 1``. The
minimum security identity is ``1``.

.. note::

   Identity 0 is not a valid value. If it shows up in Hubble output, this means
   the identity was not found. In the eBPF datapath, it has a special role
   where it denotes "any identity", i.e. as a wildcard allow in policy maps.

Security identities span over several ranges, depending on the context:

1) Cluster-local
2) ClusterMesh
3) Identities generated from CIDR-based policies

Cluster-local identities (1) range from ``1`` to ``2^16 - 1``. The lowest
values, from ``1`` to ``255``, correspond to the reserved identity range.  See
the `internal code documentation
<https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/cilium/cilium/pkg/identity#NumericIdentity>`__
for details.

For ClusterMesh (2), 8 bits are used as the ``cluster-id`` which identifies the
cluster in the ClusterMesh, into the 3rd octet as shown by ``0x00FF0000``. This

> does not apply to CIDR identities however, see (3).

Reviewer: super minor nit, Another more generic way to phrase the last sentence is to define that ClusterMesh identities must set the uppermost byte to 0. Then it's clear that they are distinct from the local identities below, and if we ever decide to allocate meaning to the other uppermost bits, no meaning would change.

Author: Addressed.

CIDR identities (3) are local to each node. CIDR identities begin from ``1``
and end at ``16777215``, however since they're shifted by ``24``, this makes
their effective range ``1 | (1 << 24)`` to ``16777215 | (1 << 24)`` or from
``16777217`` to ``33554431``.

When CIDR policies are applied, the identity generated is local to each node.
In other words, the identity may not be the same for the same CIDR policy
across two nodes. Additionally, CIDR identities are not included within the

> numerical identities range ``256`` to ``2^24 - 1``), as they're stored

Reviewer 2: ```
numerical identities range ``256`` to ``2^24 - 1``), as they're stored
                                                  ^ unmatched parenthesis
```

> separately inside the Agent.

Reviewer: I'm a little bit confused what this last sentence means. The previous paragraph already defined that the range starts at 2^24 (and the next paragraph also reiterates the allocation range). What does it mean for the identities to be stored separately inside the agent?

Author: :+1: I've removed this sentence, as it's not adding value. Probably a remnant after all the changes. I also merged it with the previous paragraph.

CIDR identities are never used for traffic between Cilium-managed nodes, so
they do not need to fit inside of a VXLAN or Geneve virtual network field.
Non-CIDR identities are limited to 24 bits so that they will fit in these
fields on the wire, but since CIDR identities will not be encoded in these
packets, they can start with a higher value. Hence, the minimum value for a
CIDR identity is ``2^24 + 1``.

Overall, the following represents the different ranges:

> .. code::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
::
```

Not actually code :)

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _security_identities:

*******************
Security Identities
*******************

Security identities are generated from labels. They are stored as ``uint32``,
which means the maximum limit for a security identity is ``2^32 - 1``. The
minimum security identity is ``1``, due to the reserved identity range being
from ``1`` to ``255``. See the `internal code documentation
<https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/cilium/cilium/pkg/identity#NumericIdentity>`_.

.. note::

   Identitiy 0 is not a valid value. If it shows up in Hubble output, this
   means the identity was not found. In the eBPF datapath, it has a special
   role where it denotes "any identity", i.e. as a wildcard allow in policy
   map.

There are two caveats to the above however:

1) ClusterMesh
2) Identities generated from CIDR-based policies

> For (1), an extra 8 bits are added as the ``cluster-id`` which identifies the
> cluster in the ClusterMesh, into the 3rd octet as shown by ``0x00FF0000``. This

Reviewer: nit,

```suggestion
For (1), 8 bits are used as the ``cluster-id`` which identifies the
cluster in the ClusterMesh, into the 3rd octet as shown by ``0x00FF0000``. This
```

> makes the security identity's upper limit ``2^24 - 1``. This does not apply to

Reviewer: I don't think it matters to have this sentence about the upper limit being `2^24-1`..? The 24-bit max should be already covered with enough detail below in the CIDR identities part.

CIDR identities however, see (2).

For (2), CIDR identities are local to each node. This means that they're not
subject to the global limit of security identities (``2^16 - 1``). CIDR
identities begin from ``1`` and end at ``16777215``, however since they're
shifted by ``24``, this makes their effective range ``1 | (1 << 24)`` to

> ``16777215 | (1 << 24)`` or from ``16777217`` to ``33554431``.  The reason that
> CIDR identities are local is because of the limitation imposed by the VXLAN or
> Geneve virtual network field size being 24 bits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``16777215 | (1 << 24)`` or from ``16777217`` to ``33554431``.  These identities do not
need to fit inside a VXLAN or Geneve virtual network field and hence are not limited to 24 bits.
```

Reviewer: ^^ I guess if we were being super clear then maybe we would just call out earlier as a separate point that there are certain constraints on the identity space, primarily that any identity which needs to be shared between nodes must fit in the packet header fields that we use to encode the identity. This means fitting inside the 24-bit VNI (virtual network identifiier) field in VXLAN or Geneve headers. Then we don't need to repeat these constrains as part of each of these later explanations. But :shrug: this documentation is already greatly improving the status quo around explanation of these crucial internals, we don't need to make the docs perfect the first time.

Author: Yeah, I opted to remove this sentence all together and just include the explanation once from https://github.com/cilium/cilium/pull/16716#discussion_r779877262.

> .. note::

Reviewer: Do we need this to be a dedicated call-out box? I think that it's fine to just drop the note / indent and let the following paragraphs flow on from this, there's no reason to highlight the below information vs. the other information in this doc.

Reviewer: ^^ If we end up with documentation where half of the writing is in `note::` sections and half isn't, then the way that the documentation UI presents the information to the user will only emphasize the information in the notes and discourage reading the non-note content. In the end this means that rather than structuring the information, we place unintended emphasis on some information.

I'll generally encourage attempting to write all docs without any sort of notes or callouts first, and only then when you have a full document, decide whether some of the information should be emphasized with `note` or `warning` sections.

Author: Hm good point, I didn't think of it like that. Good to know for the future :+1:

   When CIDR policies are applied, the identity generated is local to each
   node. In other words, the identity may not be the same for the same CIDR

>    policy across two nodes. Additionally, CIDR identities are not included
>    within the numerical identities range (``256 - 2^24 -1``), as it is stored
>    separately inside the Agent.

Reviewer: nit, switching plural vs. singular mid-sentence:

```suggestion
   policy across two nodes. Additionally, CIDR identities are not included
   within the numerical identities range (``256 - 2^24 -1``), as they are stored
   separately inside the Agent.
```

>    The reason that CIDR identities are local is because of the limitation
>    imposed by the VXLAN or Geneve virtual network field size being 24 bits.
>    Hence why CIDR identities are "local" because they cannot be transmitted on
>    the wire.

Reviewer: There's elements of truth here, but the real reason why CIDR identities are local is because they don't need to be shared across nodes so we don't have to encode them in a packet. The reason for this is that they are only used locally on the node when handling traffic between outside the cilium-managed cluster(s) and inside the current cilium-managed node.  From that, we decided to pick values outside the range covered by 0x00FFFFFF.  If they don't need to be shared, then they shouldn't reserve any of the space of identity values that _do_ need to be shared across nodes.

I've suggested the below explanation which hopefully covers the info you were trying to convey? Feel free to adopt or adapt as you see fit:

```suggestion
   CIDR identities are never used for traffic between Cilium-managed nodes, so they do not need to fit inside of a VXLAN or Geneve virtual network field. Non-CIDR identities are limited to 24 bits so that they will fit in these fields on the wire, but since CIDR identities will not be encoded in these packets, they can start with a higher value. Hence, the minimum value for a CIDR identity is `2^24` .
```
